Page 1:
 
21CSC201J – DATA STRUCTURES AND ALGORITHMS 
Unit-4  
 Trees and Hashing 
Introduction to Trees, Tree traversals, Complete Binary Tree and its height, Binary Search 
Trees, Need for Balance, Rotation, AVL trees, B Trees, Heaps, trees and array 
implementations and applications; Hash functions - Introduction, functions, Collision 
avoidance, Separate chaining, Open Addressing, Linear Probing, Quadratic probing. 
INTRODUCTION TO TREES 
• A tree is recursively defined as a set of one or more nodes where one node is 
designated as the root of the tree and all the remaining nodes can be partitioned into 
non-empty sets each of which is a sub-tree of the root. 
 
 
 
• Figure below shows a tree where node A is the root node; nodes B, C, and D are 
children of the root node and form sub-trees of the tree rooted at node A. 
 
 
Figure: Tree 
 


Page 2:
 
Basic Terminology 
Root node 
• The root node R is the topmost node in the tree. If R = NULL, then it means the tree is 
empty.  
Sub-trees 
• If the root node R is not NULL, then the trees T1, T2, and T3 are called the sub-trees of 
R.  
Leaf node 
• A node that has no children is called the leaf node or the terminal node.  
Path  
• A sequence of consecutive edges is called a path. For example, in Fig. 9.1, the path 
from the root node A to node I is given as: A, D, and I.  
Ancestor node  
• An ancestor of a node is any predecessor node on the path from root to that node. 
The root node does not have any ancestors. Nodes A, C, and G are the ancestors of 
node K. 
Descendant node 
• A descendant node is any successor node on any path from the node to a leaf node. 
Leaf nodes do not have any descendants. In the tree, nodes C, G, J, and K are the 
descendants of node A.  
Level number  
• Every node in the tree is assigned a level number in such a way that the root node is 
at level 0, children of the root node are at level number 1. Thus, every node is at one 
level higher than its parent. So, all child nodes have a level number given by parent’s 
level number + 1. 
Degree 
• Degree of a node is equal to the number of children that a node has. The degree of a 
leaf node is zero.  
In-degree  
• In-degree of a node is the number of edges arriving at that node.  
Out-degree  
• Out-degree of a node is the number of edges leaving that node. 
 


Page 3:
 
Binary Trees 
• A binary tree is a data structure that is defined as a collection of elements called nodes. 
In a binary tree, the topmost element is called the root node, and each node has 0, 1, 
or at the most 2 children.  
• A node that has zero children is called a leaf node or a terminal node. Every node 
contains a data element, a left pointer which points to the left child, and a right pointer 
which points to the right child.  
• The root element is pointed by a 'root' pointer. If root = NULL, then it means the tree 
is empty. 
 
 
Figure : Binary tree 
• In the above figure, R is the root node and the two trees T1 and T2 are called the left 
and right sub-trees of R. T1 is said to be the left successor of R. Likewise, T2 is called 
the right successor of R. 
Level number 
 
Figure : Levels in binary tree 
• Every node in the binary tree is assigned a level number. The root node is defined to 
be at level 0. The left and the right child of the root node have a level number 1. 
Similarly, every node is at one level higher than its parents. So all child nodes are 
defined to have level number as parent's level number + 1.  
Degree of a node 
• It is equal to the number of children that a node has. The degree of a leaf node is zero. 
EXPRESSION TREES  


Page 4:
 
• Binary trees are widely used to store algebraic expressions. For example, consider the 
algebraic expression given as: Exp = (a – b) + (c * d). 
• This expression can be represented using a binary tree as shown in Figure below. 
 
Figure : Expression tree 
 
• Given an expression, Exp = ((a + b) – (c * d)) % ((e ^f) / (g – h)), construct the 
corresponding binary tree. 
 
Figure : Expression tree 
TREE TRAVERSALS 
• Traversing a binary tree is the process of visiting each node in the tree exactly once in 
a systematic way. Unlike linear data structures in which the elements are traversed 
sequentially, tree is a nonlinear data structure in which the elements can be traversed 
in many different ways.  
• There are different algorithms for tree traversals. These algorithms differ in the order 
in which the nodes are visited. 
Pre-order Traversal 
• To traverse a non-empty binary tree in pre-order, the following operations are 
performed recursively at each node. The algorithm works by:  
1. Visiting the root node,  
2. Traversing the left sub-tree, and finally  
3. Traversing the right sub-tree. 
• The pre-order traversal of the tree is given as A, B, C. Root node first, the left sub-tree 
next, and then the right sub-tree. Pre-order traversal is also called as depth-first 


Page 5:
 
traversal. In this algorithm, the left sub-tree is always traversed before the right sub-
tree. 
 
Figure: Algorithm for pre-order traversal 
Example:  
 
Figure: Expression tree 
• When we traverse the elements of a tree using the pre-order traversal algorithm, the 
expression that we get is a prefix expression + – a b * c d 
 
PRE-ORDER TRAVERSAL ORDER: A, B, D, G, H, L, E, C, F, I, J, and K 
In-order Traversal 
• To traverse a non-empty binary tree in in-order, the following operations are 
performed recursively at each node. The algorithm works by:  
1. Traversing the left sub-tree, 


Page 6:
 
2. Visiting the root node, and finally  
3. Traversing the right sub-tree. 
                                      
 
                                  Figure: Binary tree 
 
• The in-order traversal of the tree is given as B, A, and C. Left sub-tree first, the root 
node next, and then the right sub-tree. In-order traversal is also called as symmetric 
traversal. 
 
Figure: Algorithm for in-order traversal 
Example: 
 
In-order traversal order : G, D, H, L, B, E, A, C, I, F, K, and J 
 
Post-order Traversal 


Page 7:
 
• To traverse a non-empty binary tree in post-order, the following operations are 
performed recursively at each node. The algorithm works by:  
1. Traversing the left sub-tree,  
2. Traversing the right sub-tree, and finally  
3. Visiting the root node. 
• The post-order traversal of the tree is given as B, C, and A. Left sub-tree first, the right 
sub-tree next, and finally the root node. 
 
Figure : Algorithm for post-order traversal 
Example: 
 
POST-ORDER TRAVERSAL: G, L, H, D, E, B, I, K, J, F, C, and A 
Level-order Traversal  
In level-order traversal, all the nodes at a level are accessed before going to the next level. 
This algorithm is also called as the breadth-first traversal algorithm. 
Example: 


Page 8:
 
 
COMPLETE BINARY TREES  
• A complete binary tree is a binary tree that satisfies two properties. First, in a complete 
binary tree, every level, except possibly the last, is completely filled. Second, all nodes 
appear as far left as possible. 
• In a complete binary tree Tn , there are exactly n nodes and level r of T can have at 
most 2r nodes. Figure below shows a complete binary tree. 
 
Figure : Complete binary tree 
 
• The height of a tree Tn having exactly n nodes is given as: Hn = | log2 (n + 1) | 
• This means, if a tree T has 10,00,000 nodes, then its height is 21. 
BINARY SEARCH TREES 
• In a binary search tree, all the nodes in the left sub-tree have a value less than that of 
the root node.  
• Correspondingly, all the nodes in the right sub-tree have a value either equal to or 
greater than the root node. The same rule is applicable to every sub-tree in the tree. 
• The root node is 39. The left sub-tree of the root node consists of nodes 9, 10, 18, 19, 
21, 27, 28, 29, and 36. All these nodes have smaller values than the root node. The 
right sub-tree of the root node consists of nodes 40, 45, 54, 59, 60, and 65. 
 


Page 9:
 
 
Figure : Binary search tree 
 
• Binary search trees are considered to be efficient data structures especially when 
compared with sorted linear arrays and linked lists.  
• In a sorted array, searching can be done in O(log2 n) time, but insertions and deletions 
are quite expensive. In contrast, inserting and deleting elements in a linked list is easier, 
but searching for an element is done in O(n) time. 
• However, in the worst case, a binary search tree will take O(n) time to search for an 
element. The worst case would occur when the tree is a linear chain of nodes (Left 
skewed or right skewed) 
 
Figure : (a) Left skewed, and (b) right skewed binary search trees 
 
Example:  
Create a binary search tree using the following data elements: 45, 39, 56, 12, 34, 78, 
32, 10, 89, 54, 67, 81 
 
Solution: 


Page 10:
 
           
 
 
 
Searching for a Node in a Binary Search Tree 
• The search function is used to find whether a given value is present in the tree or not. 
The searching process begins at the root node.  
• The function first checks if the binary search tree is empty. If it is empty, then the value 
we are searching for is not present in the tree. 
• If there are nodes in the tree, then the search function checks to see if the key value 
of the current node is equal to the value to be searched.  
• If not, it checks if the value to be searched for is less than the value of the current 
node, in which case it should be recursively called on the left child node.  
• In case the value is greater than the value of the current node, it should be recursively 
called on the right child node. 
 


Page 11:
 
 
Figure : Searching a node with value 67 in the given binary search tree 
ALGORITHM: 
 
 
Inserting a New Node in a Binary Search Tree 
• The insert function is used to add a new node with a given value at the correct position 
in the binary search tree.  
• Adding the node at the correct position means that the new node should not violate 
the properties of the binary search tree. 
ALGORITHM: 
• In Step 1 of the algorithm, the insert function checks if the current node of TREE is 
NULL. If it is NULL, the algorithm simply adds the node, else it looks at the current 
node’s value and then recurs down the left or right sub-tree. 


Page 12:
 
 
• If the current node’s value is less than that of the new node, then the right sub-tree is 
traversed, else the left sub-tree is traversed. The insert function continues moving 
down the levels of a binary tree until it reaches a leaf node.  
• The new node is added by following the rules of the binary search trees. That is, if the 
new node’s value is greater than that of the parent node, the new node is inserted in 
the right sub-tree, else it is inserted in the left sub-tree. 
• The insert function requires time proportional to the height of the tree in the worst 
case. It takes O(log n) time to execute in the average case and O(n) time in the worst 
case. 
Example: Inserting nodes with values 12 and 55 in the given binary search tree 
 
Deleting a Node from a Binary Search Tree 
• There are three cases: 
o Case 1: Deleting a Node that has No Children 
o Case 2: Deleting a Node with One Child 
o Case 3: Deleting a Node with Two Children 
   Case 1: Deleting a Node that has No Children 
• If we have to delete node 78, we can simply remove this node without any issue. This 
is the simplest case of deletion. 


Page 13:
 
 
          Figure : Deleting node 78 from the given binary search tree 
Case 2: Deleting a Node with One Child  
• To handle this case, the node’s child is set as the child of the node’s parent. In other 
words, replace the node with its child.  
• Now, if the node is the left child of its parent, the node’s child becomes the left child 
of the node’s parent.  
• Correspondingly, if the node is the right child of its parent, the node’s child becomes 
the right child of the node’s parent. 
 
Figure : Deleting node 54 from the given binary search tree 
 
Case 3: Deleting a Node with Two Children  
 
• To handle this case, replace the node’s value with its in-order predecessor (largest 
value in the left sub-tree) or in-order successor (smallest value in the right sub-tree). 
 
Figure: Deleting node 56 from the given binary search tree 


Page 14:
 
 
• This deletion could also be handled by replacing node 56 with its in-order successor, 
as shown in Figure below. 
 
 
Figure:  Deleting node 56 from the given binary search tree 
ALGORITHM: 
• In Step 1 of the algorithm, we first check if TREE=NULL, because if it is true, then the 
node to be deleted is not present in the tree. However, if that is not the case, then we 
check if the value to be deleted is less than the current node’s data.  
• In case the value is less, we call the algorithm recursively on the node’s left sub-tree, 
otherwise the algorithm is called recursively on the node’s right sub-tree. 
• If we have found the node whose value is equal to VAL, then we check which case of 
deletion it is. If the node to be deleted has both left and right children, then we find 
the in-order predecessor of the node by calling findLargestNode(TREE -> LEFT) and 
replace the current node’s value with that of its in-order predecessor.  
• Then, we call Delete(TREE -> LEFT, TEMP -> DATA) to delete the initial node of the in-
order predecessor. Thus, we reduce the case 3 of deletion into either case 1 or case 2 
of deletion. 
• If the node to be deleted does not have any child, then we simply set the node to NULL. 
• Finally, if the node to be deleted has either a left or a right child but not both, then the 
current node is replaced by its child node and the initial child node is deleted from the 
tree. 


Page 15:
 
 
• The delete function requires time proportional to the height of the tree in the worst 
case. It takes O(log n) time to execute in the average case and Ω(n) time in the worst 
case. 
NEED FOR BALANCE, ROTATION, AVL TREES  
• AVL tree is a height-balanced binary search tree. That means, an AVL tree is also a 
binary search tree but it is a balanced tree.  
• A binary tree is said to be balanced if, the difference between the heights of left and 
right subtrees of every node in the tree is either -1, 0 or +1. In other words, a binary 
tree is said to be balanced if the height of left and right children of every node differ 
by either -1, 0 or +1.  
• In an AVL tree, every node maintains an extra information known as balance factor.  
• The AVL tree was introduced in the year 1962 by G.M. Adelson-Velsky and E.M. Landis. 
Balance Factor 
• Balance factor of a node is the difference between the heights of the left and right 
subtrees of that node. The balance factor of a node is calculated either height of left 
subtree - height of right subtree (OR) height of right subtree - height of left subtree. 
Balance factor = height of Left Subtree – height of Right Subtree 
Every AVL Tree is a binary search tree but every Binary Search Tree need not be AVL tree. 
Example of AVL Tree 
• The below tree is a binary search tree and every node is satisfying balance factor 
condition. So this tree is said to be an AVL tree. 


Page 16:
 
 
Figure: AVL Tree 
AVL Tree Rotations 
• In AVL tree, after performing operations like insertion and deletion we need to check 
the balance factor of every node in the tree.  
• If every node satisfies the balance factor condition, then we conclude the operation 
otherwise we must make it balanced.  
• Whenever 
the 
tree 
becomes 
imbalanced 
due 
to 
any 
operation, 
we 
use rotation operations to make the tree balanced. Rotation operations are used to 
make the tree balanced. 
• 
There are four rotations and they are classified into two types. 
            
 
Figure: Types of Rotation 
Single Left Rotation (LL Rotation) 
• In LL Rotation, every node moves one position to left from the current position. To 
understand LL Rotation, let us consider the following insertion operation in AVL Tree. 
 
 


Page 17:
 
Single Right Rotation (RR Rotation) 
• In RR Rotation, every node moves one position to right from the current position. To 
understand RR Rotation, let us consider the following insertion operation in AVL Tree... 
 
Left Right Rotation (LR Rotation) 
• The LR Rotation is a sequence of single left rotation followed by a single right rotation. 
In LR Rotation, at first, every node moves one position to the left and one position to 
right from the current position. To understand LR Rotation, let us consider the 
following insertion operation in AVL Tree... 
 
Right Left Rotation (RL Rotation) 
• The RL Rotation is sequence of single right rotation followed by single left rotation. In 
RL Rotation, at first every node moves one position to right and one position to left 
from the current position. To understand RL Rotation, let us consider the following 
insertion operation in AVL Tree... 


Page 18:
 
 
Operations on an AVL Tree 
Insertion Operation in AVL Tree 
• In an AVL tree, the insertion operation is performed with O(log n) time complexity. In 
AVL Tree, a new node is always inserted as a leaf node. The insertion operation is 
performed as follows... 
o Step 1 - Insert the new element into the tree using Binary Search Tree insertion 
logic. 
o Step 2 - After insertion, check the Balance Factor of every node. 
o Step 3 - If the Balance Factor of every node is 0 or 1 or -1 then go for next 
operation. 
o Step 4 - If the Balance Factor of any node is other than 0 or 1 or -1 then that 
tree is said to be imbalanced. In this case, perform suitable Rotation to make 
it balanced and go for next operation. 
Example: Construct an AVL Tree by inserting numbers from 1 to 8. 
 
 
 


Page 19:
 
 
 
 
 


Page 20:
 
 
 
Deletion Operation in AVL Tree 
• The deletion operation in AVL Tree is similar to deletion operation in BST. But after 
every deletion operation, we need to check with the Balance Factor condition.  
• If the tree is balanced after deletion go for next operation otherwise perform suitable 
rotation to make the tree Balanced.  
HEAPS 
• Heap data structure is a specialized binary tree-based data structure. In a heap data 
structure, nodes are arranged based on their values. A heap data structure is also 
called as Binary Heap. 
• There are two types of heap data structures and they are as follows... 
1. Max Heap 
2. Min Heap 
Every heap data structure has the following properties... 
o Property #1 (Ordering): Nodes must be arranged in an order according 
to their values based on Max heap or Min heap. 
o Property #2 (Structural): All levels in a heap must be full except the last 
level and all nodes must be filled from left to right strictly. 


Page 21:
 
Max Heap 
• Max heap is a specialized full binary tree in which every parent node contains greater 
or equal value than its child nodes. 
 
Above tree is satisfying both Ordering property and Structural property according to the Max 
Heap data structure. 
Operations on Max Heap 
The following operations are performed on a Max heap data structure. 
1. Finding Maximum 
2. Insertion 
3. Deletion 
Finding Maximum Value Operation in Max Heap 
o Finding the node which has maximum value in a max heap is very simple. In a max 
heap, the root node has the maximum value than all other nodes. So, directly we can 
display root node value as the maximum value in max heap. 
Insertion Operation in Max Heap 
Insertion Operation in max heap is performed as follows... 
• 
Step 1 - Insert the newNode as last leaf from left to right. 
• 
Step 2 - Compare newNode value with its Parent node. 
• 
Step 3 - If newNode value is greater than its parent, then swap both of them. 
• 
Step 4 - Repeat step 2 and step 3 until newNode value is less than its parent node (or) 
newNode reaches to root. 
Example 
 
Consider the above max heap. Insert a new node with value 85. 


Page 22:
 
• 
Step 1 - Insert the new Node with value 85 as last leaf from left to right. That means 
new Node is added as a right child of node with value 75. After adding max heap is as 
follows... 
 
• 
Step 2 - Compare newNode value (85) with its Parent node value (75). That means 85 
> 75 
 
• 
Step 3 - Here newNode value (85) is greater than its parent value (75), 
then swap both of them. After swapping, max heap is as follows... 
 


Page 23:
 
• 
Step 4 - Now, again compare newNode value (85) with its parent node value (89). 
 
 
Here, newNode value (85) is smaller than its parent node value (89). So, we stop 
insertion process. Finally, max heap after insertion of a new node with value 85 is as 
follows... 
 
 
Deletion Operation in Max Heap 
• 
In a max heap, deleting the last node is very simple as it does not disturb max heap 
properties. 
• 
Deleting root node from a max heap is little difficult as it disturbs the max heap 
properties. We use the following steps to delete the root node from a max heap... 
o Step 1 - Swap the root node with last node in max heap 
o Step 2 - Delete last node. 
o Step 3 - Now, compare root value with its left child value. 
o Step 4 - If root value is smaller than its left child, then compare left child with 
its right sibling. Else goto Step 6 
o Step 5 - If left child value is larger than its right sibling, then swap 
root with left child otherwise swap root with its right child. 
o Step 6 - If root value is larger than its left child, then compare root value with 
its right child value. 
o Step 7 - If root value is smaller than its right child, then swap root with right 
child otherwise stop the process. 


Page 24:
 
o 
Step 8 - Repeat the same until root node fixes at its exact position. 
Example 
 
Consider the above max heap. Delete root node (90) from the max heap. 
• 
Step 1 - Swap the root node (90) with last node 75 in max heap. After swapping max 
heap is as follows... 
 
• 
Step 2 - Delete last node. Here the last node is 90. After deleting node with value 90 
from heap, max heap is as follows... 
 
• 
Step 3 - Compare root node (75) with its left child (89). 
 


Page 25:
 
Here, root value (75) is smaller than its left child value (89). So, compare left child (89) 
with its right sibling (70). 
 
• 
Step 4 - Here, left child value (89) is larger than its right sibling (70), So, swap root 
(75) with left child (89). 
 
• 
Step 5 - Now, again compare 75 with its left child (36). 
 
Here, node with value 75 is larger than its left child. So, we compare node 75 with its 
right child 85. 


Page 26:
 
 
• 
Step 6 - Here, node with value 75 is smaller than its right child (85). So, we swap both 
of them. After swapping max heap is as follows... 
 
• 
Step 7 - Now, compare node with value 75 with its left child (15). 
 
 
• 
Here, node with value 75 is larger than its left child (15) and it does not have right 
child. So we stop the process. 
 


Page 27:
 
• 
Finally, max heap after deleting root node (90) is as follows... 
 
Min Heap 
• 
The value of the root node is less than or equal to either of its children. 
HASH FUNCTIONS - INTRODUCTION, FUNCTIONS, COLLISION AVOIDANCE, 
SEPARATE CHAINING, OPEN ADDRESSING, LINEAR PROBING, QUADRATIC 
PROBING. 
HASH TABLE, HASHING 
• 
Hash table is a data structure in which keys are mapped to array positions by a hash 
function. 
• 
A value stored in a hash table can be searched in O(1) time by using a hash function 
which generates an address from the key (by producing the index of the array where 
the value is stored). 
• 
In a hash table, an element with key k is stored at index h(k) and not k. It means a hash 
function h is used to calculate the index at which the element with key k will be 
stored.  
• 
This process of mapping the keys to appropriate locations (or indices) in a hash table 
is called hashing. 
HASH FUNCTION  
• 
A hash function is a mathematical formula which, when applied to a key, produces an 
integer which can be used as an index for the key in the hash table.  
• 
The main aim of a hash function is that elements should be relatively, randomly, and 
uniformly distributed. It produces a unique set of integers within some suitable range in 
order to reduce the number of collisions. 
• 
One of the mostly used hash function is DIVISION METHOD. 
Division Method 


Page 28:
 
• 
It is the simplest method of hashing an integer x. This method divides x by M and then 
uses the remainder obtained. In this case, the hash function can be given as  
h(x) = x mod M 
• 
The division method is quite good for just about any value of M and since it requires only 
a single division operation, the method works very fast. However, extra care should be 
taken to select a suitable value for M. 
Example:  
Calculate the hash values of keys 1234 and 5462 using Division Method 
 
Solution :  
 
Setting M = 97, hash values can be calculated as:  
h(1234) = 1234 % 97 = 70 
h(5642) = 5642 % 97 = 16 
COLLISION 
 
Figure: Relationship between keys and hash table index 
• 
Figure above shows a hash table in which each key from the set K is mapped to locations 
generated by using a hash function.  
• 
Note that keys k2 and k6 point to the same memory location. This is known as collision. 
That is, when two or more keys map to the same memory location, a collision is said to 
occur.  
• 
Similarly, keys k5 and k7 also collide.  
COLLISION RESOLUTION TECHNIQUE 
• 
Collisions occur when the hash function maps two different keys to the same location. 
Obviously, two records cannot be stored in the same location. Therefore, a method used 
to solve the problem of collision, also called collision resolution technique, is applied.  
• 
The two most popular methods of resolving collisions are:  
1. Open addressing  
2. Separate Chaining 


Page 29:
 
COLLISION RESOLUTION BY OPEN ADDRESSING 
• 
Once a collision takes place, open addressing or closed hashing computes new positions 
using a probe sequence and the next record is stored in that position.  
• 
In this technique, all the values are stored in the hash table. The hash table contains two 
types of values: sentinel values (e.g., –1) and data values.  
• 
The presence of a sentinel value indicates that the location contains no data value at 
present but can be used to hold a value. 
• 
The process of examining memory locations in the hash table is called probing.  
• 
Open addressing technique can be implemented using  
o linear probing 
o quadratic probing 
o double hashing 
Linear Probing  
• 
The simplest approach to resolve a collision is linear probing. In this technique, if a value 
is already stored at a location generated by h(k), then the following hash function is used 
to resolve the collision: 
 
• 
Where m is the size of the hash table, h’(k) = (k mod m), and i is the probe number that 
varies from 0 to m–1 
Example: 
Consider a hash table of size 10. Using linear probing, insert the keys 72, 27, 36, 24, 63, 81, 
92, and 101 into the table.    
 Let h’(k) = k mod m, m = 10 
 Initially, the hash table can be given as: 
 
 


Page 30:
 
 
 
 
 


Page 31:
 
 
Quadratic Probing 
• 
In this technique, if a value is already stored at a location generated by h(k), then the 
following hash function is used to resolve the collision: 
 
• 
Quadratic probing eliminates the primary clustering phenomenon of linear probing 
because instead of doing a linear search, it does a quadratic search. For a given key k, first 
the location generated by h’(k) mod m is probed.  
• 
If the location is free, the value is stored in it, else subsequent locations probed are offset 
by factors that depend in a quadratic manner on the probe number i.  
• 
Although quadratic probing performs better than linear probing, in order to maximize the 
utilization of the hash table, the values of c1, c2, and m need to be constrained. 
Example: 
Consider a hash table of size 10. Using quadratic probing, insert the keys 72, 27, 36, 24, 63, 
81, and 101 into the table. Take c1 = 1 and c2 = 3. 
Solution: 
Let h’(k) = k mod m, m = 10 Initially, the hash table can be given as: 
 


Page 32:
 
 
 
 


Page 33:
 
 
 
Double Hashing  
• 
To start with, double hashing uses one hash value and then repeatedly steps forward an 
interval until an empty location is reached. 
• 
 The interval is decided using a second, independent hash function, hence the name 
double hashing.  
• 
In double hashing, we use two hash functions rather than a single function. The hash 
function in the case of double hashing can be given as: 
 
Pros and Cons  
• 
Double hashing minimizes repeated collisions and the effects of clustering. That is, double 
hashing is free from problems associated with primary clustering as well as secondary 
clustering. 
Example: 
Consider a hash table of size = 10. Using double hashing, insert the keys 72, 27, 36, 24, 63, 81, 
92, and 101 into the table. Take h1 = (k mod 10) and h2 = (k mod 8).  
Solution  
Let m = 10 Initially, the hash table can be given as: 
 


Page 34:
 
      
 
 
     
 
     
 


Page 35:
 
 
 
 
 


Page 36:
 
COLLISION RESOLUTION BY SEPARATE CHAINING 
• 
The idea behind separate chaining is to implement the array as a linked list called a chain. 
The linked list data structure is used to implement this technique. 
• 
When multiple elements are hashed into the same slot index, then these elements are 
inserted into a singly-linked list which is known as a chain.  
 
Example:  
 
Let us consider a simple hash function as “key mod 5” and a sequence of keys as 12, 22, 15, 
25 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


